Hi, I'm Bobby. I'm a software engineer,


creative developer, and former visual


effects artist. Let's build something


cool. [music]


This is an updated version of a classic


3JS Earth project using TSL with higher


fidelity atmosphere, better day and


night blending, fewer textures, and more


room for extra effects.


Since we're doing it with TSL, we get


shader level control without writing a


bunch of raw GLSL or WGSL. Instead, TSL,


the 3JS shading language, is flexible,


easy to get started with, and scales


really well. It still lacks full


documentation, but it's improving with


every release.


So, let's start from my web GPU template


available on my GitHub link in the


description. It gives you a scene,


camera, renderer, and a few other things


right out of the box.


Let's get started by adding the sun and


the stars.


We'll use a directional light, which is


basically a light that shoots into


infinity, which simulates the sun's


light really well.


Let's move it back in space a little


bit.


We'll remove the gradient background,


define the background as black, and add


a star field with, I don't know, as many


stars as you want, maybe 3,000 stars.


This is one of the big performance wins


using TSL and web GPU. Previously, I


rendered the stars all as individual


points on the CPU.


Using the GPU is much, much more


performant. For more details on how the


stars were created, check out this


video, stars animation. Okay, let's


replace the Taurus knot with a sphere


geometry.


We'll give it enough segments for smooth


lighting. Let's go 64x 64. That's going


to create 4,225


verts.


Now, we'll load up textures. We'll start


with just the day texture. We'll use a


mesh standard node material for the


globe material. Okay, let's assign the


day texture to the color node of our


material. If you don't see a sunlit


earth here, fix that before moving on.


Great. That's working nicely, but our


earth lacks a certain realism. It kind


of looks like just a globe lit up.


If you want to support my channel more


directly, Patreon is the move. link in


the description. Now, we're going to mix


in the night texture based on the sun's


orientation.


Here's how we compute the sun's


orientation.


We're going to use a dot product. Each


pixel on that sphere. When the sphere is


facing the sun directly, that's one.


When it's exactly perpendicular, I guess


at the edge, that's zero. And if it's


completely other side of where our light


is pointing, that's negative one. This


is how we know if a pixel is in daytime


or nighttime.


We're going to use a smooth step


function to smoothly transition from the


light side to the dark side. If we don't


use it, we get a smooth transition. It's


just not as pronounced as as we'd like


it to be. And we could even get rid of


that altogether using the step function.


Here's what that looks like.


Back to smooth step.


We're blending the day texture with the


night texture based on where the light


is. Roughness, the shininess of a


material versus the matte quality of a


material. We're going to pull that from


a special texture that we load. This is


an encoded texture packed with lots of


data. Bump roughness clouds. So the red


channel in this image is the bump data.


Where it's fully red, it's as high as it


could be. Fully black is not high at


all. That's the red channel. In the


green channel, roughness. Fully green


means it's rough. If it's black, then


it's shiny.


The blue channel contains the cloud


data. We pack it all into one file.


There's fewer files to load and it uses


less memory. So, we've got the roughness


from the green channel. We remap it to a


nice range using these uniforms,


roughness low and roughness high. This


makes the oceans and the land stand out


better under the sun.


Defining these uniforms at the top of


the file makes it so you can easily


tweak them. We're going to use the red


channel from our encoded image. We're


going to feed it into TSL's bump map. It


converts the grayscale or in this case


just the red channel into perturbed


normals making the surface look bumpy


without actually changing the geometry.


In the case of this project, it's more


for the clouds than it is for the


mountains. Okay, speaking of clouds,


we'll use the blue channel from our


special encoded image for the clouds.


And now we'll use our trusty smooth step


once again to adjust the look of the


clouds. We can even animate the clouds


using this TSL expression. When we


incorporate time, we're getting an


animated value, a value that starts,


it's like a lapse time. It starts at


zero and increments from there. And we


can use that for animation purposes like


this.


This is looking pretty good, but it's


still lacking something, and that's the


atmospheric glow, frenel shading. What's


frenel shading? shading based on how


much the surface is angled away from the


camera. It's zero when you're looking


straight at a pixel and it's one at the


edges. Okay, we're going to make the


atmosphere color shift blue on the day


side, warm near the twilight on the


edges, and we're going to blend those


colors based on the sun's orientation.


Now we mix the atmosphere in with the


globe material output which already


includes a color node, bump node, the


roughness node. [music]


The atmospheric strength uses smooth


step for a smooth transition based on


these values. Then we assign it to the


output node of our material. TSL's


output is the result of a lighting


calculation in the mesh standard


material. Now the globe has a really


nice atmospheric tint to it.


As a final touch, we're going to create


an atmosphere shell mesh. It's the same


sphere geometry scaled up just a little


bit.


We'll use a mesh basic material to make


it render backside only and slightly


transparent.


The alpha comes from the Fresnel


function shaped with remap and POW and


then multiplied by the sun mask. Then we


output the atmospheric color with that


alpha value. The scale is set to 1.03.


So it's just like a halo over our Earth


model. We have a simple animation loop


where we rotate the Earth slowly, update


our orbit controls, and render. That's


it. Some easy modifications to try.


Separate the clouds into their own


sphere and then you can rotate them or


manipulate them however you want. Have


it cast shadows for example. Play with


the ocean roughness. Make it shinier.


Add a noise function to alter the


shininess mo some. Add an interactive


element to this project. Thanks so much


for stopping by and I'll see you in the


next one.